Dear members of the program committee,

The following abstract is for submission to the Ninth Conference on
Atmospheric Radiation. The work shows a large sensitivity of the
organization of tropical convection to the radiative effects of anvil
cloud, therefore it fits most closely with the theme of "relationships
between radiative fluxes, moist atmospheric processes, and surface
hydrology". The work is very interdisciplinary, and it was difficult
to decide between submitting it to your conference and the session on
"cloud/radiation/hydrological cycle interactions" in the Conference on
Climate Variations. We decided the Atmospheric Radiation Conference is
the more appropriate venue because the sensitivity study isolated the
radiative effects of tropical anvils. My preference is for an oral
presentation.

Sincerely,
Charlie Zender

"Sensitivity of a climate simulation to the radiative effects of 
tropical cirrus anvil cloud"
 
Charles S. Zender  
Jeffrey T. Kiehl  
NCAR, P.O. Box 3000, Boulder, CO,
80307-3000 USA
ph. 303-497-1612  
fax 303-497-1324
zender@ncar.ucar.edu  

Climate sensitivity to the radiative effects of tropical anvil is
investigated using a simple prognostic ice cloud scheme in a version
of the National Center for Atmospheric Research Community Climate
Model.  Two numerical climate integrations are forced by 1985-1989
sea surface temperature (SST): the control, with diagnostic ice cloud,
and the experiment, with ice cloud forecast from modeled and observed
characteristics of tropical anvil lifecycle (i.e., convective origin,
vertical profile, phase, mesoscale precipitation, and lifetime).  The
sensitivity experiment predicts enhanced ice and reduced liquid over
most latitudes.  Increase in hydrometeor size associated with anvil
weakens cloud radiative extinction per unit mass by factors of 1--3.
The weaker mass extinction efficiency approximately balances enhanced
ice amount so that anvil ice mass quadruples without biasing the mean
radiative energy balance.

Enhanced anvil perturbs the tropical upper troposphere temperature
structure more strongly in winter, when the column is clearer and
anvil radiatively heats the troposphere above 200 mb.  In the summer
tropics, enhanced anvil reduces radiative cooling up to 200 mb, and
enhances cooling above that.  The prognostic anvil is less strongly
coupled to SST.  Based on the 1987 El Nino, the underprediction of
shortwave cloud forcing sensitivity to SST indicates anvil ice crystal
size or habit may be sensitive to SST.  The prognostic anvil
formulation improves longwave cloud radiative response to SST cooling
but worsens response to warming > 2 C.  In conjunction with
weaker mass extinction efficiency of large ice, this weakens the
feedback between longwave cloud forcing and convection over SST
maxima.  The net response of convection is a shift toward the winter
hemisphere in solstice months.  These changes lead to a significant
response in the extratropical height field in January.




